ztp/resource-generator/.konflux/README.md, before:

# RPM lock files in Konflux

## Overview
When installing external software via RPMs in Konflux builds, we need to integrate a RPM lock file management in our workflow: the primary goal is to ensure that hermetic builds ,required by Konflux Conforma, can pre-fetch RPM dependencies before building the Docker image. A hermetic build without lock files, relying on dynamic downloads exclusively, would fail due to no internet access otherwise.

More information about the hermetic builds in the [Konflux Hermetic Builds FAQ](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/faq/hermetic.html)

## RPM lock file management

### Generate a rpm lock file

We will be using a generator named `rpm-lock-file-prototype` according to the directions provided by that project on the [rpm-lockfile-prototype README](https://github.com/konflux-ci/rpm-lockfile-prototype?tab=readme-ov-file#installation)

The `rpms.lock.yaml` has been generated from the input provided by `rpms.in.yaml: this file must be manually created from scratch by Konflux developers with the following fields:

1. `repofiles`: the .repo file extracted from the runtime base image for ztp (a `ubi.repo` file from ubi8 so far)
2. `packages`: the rpms we depend on
3. `arches`: the supported architectures for building
4. `Containerfile`: the Containerfile used to build the ztp image.


### Introduce rpms based on new subscriptions

So far, no additional subscription-manager/activation-key config has been carried out,as the RPMs we currently depend on don't require a Red Hat subscription. In case future development requires to subscribe to new rpm repos, see this [Konflux activation key doc](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/activation-keys-subscription.html#_configuring_an_rpm_lockfile_for_hermetic_builds).

### Configure the .tekton yaml files

The push/pull tekton yaml files in `.tekton` have been configured to setup a hermetic build workflow according to the [Konflux prefetch doc](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/prefetching-dependencies.html#_procedure)

1. Enable hermetic builds
```yaml
   - name: hermetic
     value: "true"

2. Enable rpm pre-fetch
```yaml
   - name: prefetch-input
     value: '{"type": "rpm", "path": "ztp/resource-generator/.konflux"}'

3. Enable dev package managers
```yaml
   - name: dev-package-managers
     value: "true"

### Update  rpms
Konflux provides a mechanism (Mintmaker) to automatically file PRs to update RPM versions and generate the updated lockfile. At time of writing, this is limited to a `rpm.locks.yaml` file present in the project root, which in the case of ztp (a multicomponent project: ztp-site-generate and cnf-tests) is not viable so we will have to re-generate the `rpm.locks.yaml` using our own tools in the interim (scripts/automation)

Commit message:

ztp: CNF-18558: Integrate rpm lock script workflow for ztp     - Integrate rhel8 lock file generation using ubi8 for ztp         - We don't need subscriptions for this as the only packages we need are in the ubi     - Update .gitignore files for the lock directories to account for the new generated and temporary files     - Update Makefile for ztp to generate the lock files     - Replace `redhat.repo` configuration with embeded repos in the rpm.in.yaml file for ztp         - This matches the configuration in the cnf-tests folder
Assisted-by: Cursor/claude-4-sonnet
AI-attribution: AIA,Human-AI blend,Human-initiated,Reviewed,Cursor/claude-4-sonnet,v1.0
For more information on AI attribution statements, see: https://aiattribution.github.io/

ztp/resource-generator/.konflux/README.md, after:

# RPM lock files in Konflux

## Overview
When installing external software via RPMs in Konflux builds, we need to integrate a RPM lock file management in our workflow: the primary goal is to ensure that hermetic builds ,required by Konflux Conforma, can pre-fetch RPM dependencies before building the Docker image. A hermetic build without lock files, relying on dynamic downloads exclusively, would fail due to no internet access otherwise.

More information about the hermetic builds in the [Konflux Hermetic Builds FAQ](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/faq/hermetic.html)

## RPM lock file management

### Generate a rpm lock file

We will be using a generator named `rpm-lock-file-prototype` according to the directions provided by that project on the [rpm-lockfile-prototype README](https://github.com/konflux-ci/rpm-lockfile-prototype?tab=readme-ov-file#installation)

The `rpms.lock.yaml` has been generated from the input provided by `rpms.in.yaml: this file must be manually created from scratch by Konflux developers with the following fields:

1. `repofiles`: the .repo file extracted from the runtime base image for ztp (a `ubi.repo` file from ubi8 so far)
2. `packages`: the rpms we depend on
3. `arches`: the supported architectures for building
4. `Containerfile`: the Containerfile used to build the ztp image.


### Introduce rpms based on new subscriptions

So far, no additional subscription-manager/activation-key config has been carried out,as the RPMs we currently depend on don't require a Red Hat subscription. In case future development requires to subscribe to new rpm repos, see this [Konflux activation key doc](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/activation-keys-subscription.html#_configuring_an_rpm_lockfile_for_hermetic_builds).

### Configure the .tekton yaml files

The push/pull tekton yaml files in `.tekton` have been configured to setup a hermetic build workflow according to the [Konflux prefetch doc](https://konflux.pages.redhat.com/docs/users/how-tos/configuring/prefetching-dependencies.html#_procedure)

1. Enable hermetic builds
```yaml
   - name: hermetic
     value: "true"

2. Enable rpm pre-fetch
```yaml
   - name: prefetch-input
     value: '{"type": "rpm", "path": "ztp/resource-generator/.konflux"}'

3. Enable dev package managers
```yaml
   - name: dev-package-managers
     value: "true"

### Update rpms

#### Automatic Updates via Konflux
Konflux provides a mechanism (Mintmaker) to automatically file PRs to update RPM versions and generate the updated lockfile. At time of writing, this is limited to a `rpm.locks.yaml` file present in the project root, which in the case of ztp (a multicomponent project: ztp-site-generate and cnf-tests) is not viable so we will have to re-generate the `rpm.locks.yaml` using our own tools in the interim (scripts/automation).

#### Manual Regeneration using Makefile
To manually regenerate the rpm lock configuration, use the following Makefile targets from the `ztp/resource-generator/` directory:

1. **Update rpm lock file for runtime:**
   ```bash
   make konflux-update-rpm-lock-runtime
   ```
   This target will:
   - Sync git submodules
   - Generate RHEL8 locks using the base image specified in the Containerfile
   - Automatically extract UBI8 release version from the Containerfile
   - Update the `.konflux/lock-runtime/rpms.lock.yaml` file

**Configuration Options:**
- `RHEL8_RELEASE`: RHEL8 release version (automatically extracted from Containerfile)
- `RHEL9_RELEASE`: RHEL9 release version (default: 9.4)
- `RHEL8_ACTIVATION_KEY`: Red Hat activation key for RHEL8 (not needed for UBI packages)
- `RHEL8_ORG_ID`: Red Hat organization ID for RHEL8 (not needed for UBI packages)
- `RHEL9_ACTIVATION_KEY`: Red Hat activation key for RHEL9 (not needed for UBI packages)  
- `RHEL9_ORG_ID`: Red Hat organization ID for RHEL9 (not needed for UBI packages)
